JUDY WOODRUFF: The final jobs
U.S. report
for 2015 helped finish the year
off with solid
growth. Overall, the economy
added 2.6 million
jobs last year. Combined with
2014, that led
to a two-year gain in jobs that
was the best
since the late '90s.
And, yet, wage growth remained
slow or modest
at best for the year, around 2.5
percent.
Tom Perez is the secretary of
labor, and he
joins me now.
And welcome back to the program.
THOMAS PEREZ, U.S. Secretary of
Labor: Pleasure
to be with you and all your
viewers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this is a
strong year of
growth. I saw one report that
said it's -- called
it a red-hot hiring spree.
What's behind this? What was
driving this?
THOMAS PEREZ: Well, your
introduction is really
spot on.
When you look at the last two
years, not simply
the last month -- and, by the
way, the best
month of -- the best quarter of
2015 was the
last quarter of 2015 -- when you
look at the
last two years, this is the best
two-year
stretch we have had since the
late '90s.
You look at auto sales. Last
year was the
hottest year for auto sales in
history. You
look at the -- you look at the
fact that this
six-year stretch of auto sales
is the best
stretch we have had since the
end of World
War II. And you look at not only
the quantity
of jobs, Judy, but the quality
of jobs, because
what we're seeing over the last
two years
is not only good numbers, but
very good quality.
And you look at, for instance,
professional
and business services. That's
been the biggest
growth area over the last two
years. These
are good jobs. Construction had
a good year
last year. And with the
infrastructure bill
that passed at the end of last
year, I expect
construction will continue to do
well.
Health care, notwithstanding the
truth deniers
who say the ACA is a job killer,
the health
care has been a recession...
JUDY WOODRUFF: The health care
law.
THOMAS PEREZ: That's been a
recession-proof
industry.
So, quantity and quality has
been moving forward,
and that's a good thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, much of the
underlying
data is strong, Mr. Secretary,
but there still
are some signs of concern.
THOMAS PEREZ: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I want to ask
you if it's
concern. It looks as if jobs
that pay at the
higher end, people earning more,
are doing
better than those in the middle-
and lower-income
levels. Wage -- as we just
mentioned, wage
growth is stagnant.
How do you explain that
persistent stubbornness
in terms of getting wages
higher?
THOMAS PEREZ: Well, what
invariably happens
in a recovery is the jobs that
come back first
are the lower-paying jobs, and
that's what
happened in this recovery.
Now what you're seeing in recent
years, which
is a good thing, is that more
jobs that pay
better are coming back. And
that's what I
was mentioning about the last
two years. The
challenge of wage stagnation is
an undeniable
challenge and it predates the
great recession.
Last year's real wage growth of
2.1 percent
was the best we have had since
the recovery
began. And so that's solid, but
that's not
enough. And, again, this issue
dates back
to really the late '70s. And for
decades after
World War II, productivity and
real wage growth
went hand in hand. Americans
helped bake the
pie of prosperity and they
shared in those
benefits.
And then it became delinked
starting in the
late '70s, with the exception of
the end of
the Clinton administration. And
so we still
have real work to do on real
wage growth.
That's the unfinished business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it sounds
like something,
though, that you expect to
continue, the slow
wage...
THOMAS PEREZ: Well, last year,
again, was
the best year we have seen in
the recovery.
And in the end of the Clinton
administration,
the unemployment rate was 4
percent. And so
one of the things we can do to
put upward
pressure on wages is to continue
to have tight
labor markets. Another thing we
can do is
to raise the minimum wage.
Another thing we
can do is the regulations the
president has
directed us to do to make sure
that people
who work overtime get paid
overtime.
And then investing in skills is
a tried-and-true
method of helping people get
access to those
middle-class jobs that are out
there in I.T.
and other sectors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Broaden this out
for us. We
know that, globally, China is
slowing down.
We have done a lot of reporting
on that, what's
happening to China's market.
That's having
global repercussions.
THOMAS PEREZ: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then you have
oil, the
price of oil, at record lows.
How much do you worry about the
effect of
things like that on the U.S.
economy and U.S.
jobs?
THOMAS PEREZ: Well, the price of
oil as it
is now for consumers is an
unmitigated boon.
You go to a gas pump, and you're
paying less
than $2 a gallon. The average
family last
year had about $500 to $800 of
additional
money in their pockets. That's
good for consumers.
And what do they do with that
money? They
spend it. And so you see very
good numbers
on consumer spending in the
United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Unless you're
working in the
oil industry.
THOMAS PEREZ: And, of course,
the challenge
for those working in the sector
-- and we
have seen that impact in the
mining sector,
which is where the oil jobs are
found.
And, certainly, the headwinds
from China,
and others in the strong dollar,
it's more
difficult to manufacture, and so
the manufacturing
numbers in 2015 weren't as good.
But, again, we had these
headwinds in 2015
as well. I did a lot of numbers
days interviews
when people said the market was
volatile over
the last two weeks. Isn't --
isn't -- the
job numbers, aren't they going
to go down?
And you look, and you see we
have had two
years in a row of north of
200,000 jobs a
month on average. That's solid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One other thing I
want to ask
you about, Mr. Secretary, is the
labor force
participation rate. It continues
at what I
understand to be a four-decade
low. What is
it, 62 percent of Americans who
want to be
or would like to be in the labor
force actually
have a job.
So how do you -- what's the
prospect for the
future for people who want to
work, either
don't have the job they want or
don't have
any job?
THOMAS PEREZ: Well, the labor
force participation
rate over the last year has been
basically
the same. It's about 62.6
percent.
And it's been a very narrow
band. And the
reason it has gone down from,
say, 10 years
ago, 15 years ago, even five
years ago, the
primary reason it's gone down is
because of
the aging of the population.
Economists say
that roughly 50 percent of the
reduction in
labor force participation is
attributable
to demographics.
The main thing that we could do
to increase
labor force participation at a
policy level
is to enact federal paid leave.
The countries
that have enacted paid leave
laws -- and Canada
is a great example. In 2000, the
female labor
force participation in the U.S.
and Canada
was identical.
Because of their investment in
paid leave,
they are now 8 percent ahead of
the United
States. If we had kept pace, we
would have
5.5 million more women in the
workplace, making
the Silicon Valley and Wall
Street look more
like America, making our
Medicare trust fund
and Social Security trust fund
more secure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a big debate
about that
right now out on the campaign
trail.
THOMAS PEREZ: Amen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Labor Secretary
Tom Perez,
thank you very much.
THOMAS PEREZ: Always a pleasure.